RNA-Seq Header Section (#216)
AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples: 03-rnaseq/00-intro-to-rnaseq.Rmd

As with all experimental methods, RNA-seq has strengths and limitations that you should consider in regards to your scientific questions. 

### RNA-seq data **strengths**:  

- RNA-seq can collect data on more transcripts (it is less bound to a pre-determined set of probes like microarray is). 
- It's values are considered more dynamic than microarray values which are constrained to the number of probes.

### RNA-seq data **limitations**:  

The nature of RNA sequencing steps introduce several different kinds of biases: 
- **GC bias**: higher GC content sequences are less likely to be observed.  
- **3' bias**: for most sequencing methods, the 3 prime end of transcripts are more likely to be observed.  
- **Complexity bias**: some sequences are easier to be bound and amplified than others.   
- **Library size or sequencing depth**: the total number of reads is not always equivalent between samples.  
- **Gene length**: longer genes are more likely to be observed.   

> This figure from @Love2016 briefly summarizes these biases.   

Author: Good point! Yes, I think that's a good idea.

See here for more about the [quantile normalization process in refine.bio](http://docs.refine.bio/en/latest/main_text.html#quantile-normalization)

### More resources on RNA-seq technology: 

- [StatsQuest: A gentle introduction to RNA-seq](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tlf6wYJrwKY) [@Starmer2017-rnaseq].
- [A general background on the wet lab methods of RNA-seq](https://bitesizebio.com/13542/what-everyone-should-know-about-rna-seq/) [@Hadfield2016].
- [Modeling of RNA-seq fragment sequence bias reduces systematic errors in transcript abundance estimation](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5143225/) [@Love2016].
- [Biases in Illumina transcriptome sequencing caused by random hexamer priming](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/9d16/997f5de72d6c606fef3d673db70e5d1d8e1e.pdf?_ga=2.131436679.965169313.1600175795-124991789.1600175795) [@Hansen2010].
- [Computation for RNA-seq and ChIP-seq studies](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4121056/) [@Pepke2009].
- [StatsQuest: A gentle introduction to RNA-seq](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tlf6wYJrwKY) [@Starmer2017-rnaseq].

## About DESeq2

> DESeq2 is an R package that can normalize and handle RNA-seq data. @Love2014.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DESeq2 is an R package that can normalize and handle RNA-seq data @Love2014.
```

This is to follow the format for in-text citations seen throughout this notebook.

### Further resources for DESeq2

- [StatsQuest: RPKM, FPKM and TPM, Clearly Explained!!!](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TTUrtCY2k-w) [@Starmer2015].
- [StatsQuest: DESeq2, part 1, Library Normalization](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UFB993xufUU) [@Starmer2017-deseq2].
- [DESeq2 vignette: Analyzing RNA-seq data with DESeq2](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html) [@Love2014].
- [Beginner's guide to DESeq2](Bhttps://bioc.ism.ac.jp/packages/2.14/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/beginner.pdf) [@Love2014-guide].
- [Introduction to DGE - using DESeq2](https://hbctraining.github.io/DGE_workshop/lessons/04_DGE_DESeq2_analysis.html)

#### Why doesn't the gene I care about show up in this dataset?

There can be a lot of reasons a particular gene might not show up in your refine.bio RNA-seq dataset, here are just a few reasons:  
  - The gene was not actually expressed in the cells in the first place.  
  - The gene was not expressed at high enough levels to be detectable.

>   - The gene does not have an Ensembl ID according to the [version of the annotation]() we used. 

Author: This is dependent on https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-docs/issues/137, will put a TODO here for now.

<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**  *generated with [DocToc](https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc)*

- [Introduction to RNA-seq technology](#introduction-to-rna-seq-technology)
  - [RNA-seq data **strengths**:](#rna-seq-data-strengths)
  - [RNA-seq data **limitations**:](#rna-seq-data-limitations)
  - [About quantile normalization](#about-quantile-normalization)
  - [More resources on RNA-seq technology:](#more-resources-on-rna-seq-technology)
- [About DESeq2](#about-deseq2)
  - [DESeq2 objects](#deseq2-objects)
  - [DESeq2 normalization methods](#deseq2-normalization-methods)
  - [Further resources for DESeq2](#further-resources-for-deseq2)
    - [Why doesn't the gene I care about show up in this dataset?](#why-doesnt-the-gene-i-care-about-show-up-in-this-dataset)
    - [Why do these examples use DESeq2 and not EdgeR or ____](#why-do-these-examples-use-deseq2-and-not-edger-or-____)
    - [What if I care about isoforms?](#what-if-i-care-about-isoforms)
- [References](#references)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Introduction to RNA-seq technology

> Data analyses are generally not "one size fits all"; this is particularly true as we are working with different technologies. 

Reviewer 2: What do we mean by different technologies? Can be explicit here.

This tutorial has example analyses [organized by technology](../01-getting-started/getting-started.html#about-how-this-tutorial-book-is-structured) so you can follow examples that are more closely tailored to the nature of the data at hand. 

As with all experimental methods, RNA-seq has strengths and limitations that you should consider in regards to your scientific questions. 

### RNA-seq data **strengths**:  

> - RNA-seq can collect data on more transcripts (it is less bound to a pre-determined set of probes like microarray is). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- RNA-seq can assay unknown transcripts, as it is not bound to a pre-determined set of probes like microarrays. 
```

> - It's values are considered more dynamic than microarray values which are constrained to the number of probes.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean the dynamic range of values? Do you have a citation for `microarray values which are constrained to the number of probes`?

> ### RNA-seq data **limitations**:  

Reviewer 2: Very minor (petty?), but I find the inconsistent usage of `:` at the end of headers to be distracting.

> The nature of RNA sequencing steps introduce several different kinds of biases:

Reviewer 2: Not all of these are specific to RNA-seq.

- **Library size or sequencing depth**: the total number of reads is not always equivalent between samples.  
- **Gene length**: longer genes are more likely to be observed.   

This figure from @Love2016 briefly summarizes some of these biases.   
  
<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/8e31eed8a70f6653dd263fc689bc230050a2b22d/components/figures/Love2016-fig1.png" width=700>

Most normalization methods, including [refine.bio's processing methods](http://docs.refine.bio/en/latest/main_text.html#rna-seq-pipelines), attempt to mitigate these biases, but these biases can never be fully negated.
Some of these biases have been addressed to the extent that they can by our refine.bio processing methods so you don't have to worry too much about them.
In brief, refine.bio data is quantified by Salmon using their correction algorithms: [`--seqbias`](https://salmon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/salmon.html#seqbias) , [`--gcbias`](https://salmon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/salmon.html#gcbias), and [`--posBias`](https://salmon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/salmon.html#posbias).

### About quantile normalization

> Refine.bio data is available for you [quantile normalized](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantile_normalization), which can address some library size biases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
refine.bio data is available for you [quantile normalized](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantile_normalization), which can address some library size biases.
```

I made a change to contributing about this that appears to have been removed at some point? https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/commit/09544240e31d52ecd3494760a8690ceff31dbb3c#diff-6a3371457528722a734f3c51d9238c13

Reviewer 2: Looks like probably #187 is the culprit.

<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/e140face75daa6d2c34e30a4755c362e6039a677/template/screenshots/skip-quantile-normalization.png" width=500>

See here for more about the [quantile normalization process in refine.bio](http://docs.refine.bio/en/latest/main_text.html#quantile-normalization)

### More resources on RNA-seq technology: 

- [StatsQuest: A gentle introduction to RNA-seq](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tlf6wYJrwKY) [@Starmer2017-rnaseq].
- [A general background on the wet lab methods of RNA-seq](https://bitesizebio.com/13542/what-everyone-should-know-about-rna-seq/) [@Hadfield2016].
- [Modeling of RNA-seq fragment sequence bias reduces systematic errors in transcript abundance estimation](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5143225/) [@Love2016].
- [Biases in Illumina transcriptome sequencing caused by random hexamer priming](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/9d16/997f5de72d6c606fef3d673db70e5d1d8e1e.pdf?_ga=2.131436679.965169313.1600175795-124991789.1600175795) [@Hansen2010].
- [Computation for RNA-seq and ChIP-seq studies](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4121056/) [@Pepke2009].

## About DESeq2

> DESeq2 is an R package that can normalize and handle RNA-seq data @Love2014.

Author: Yeah, in general. But in our examples we end up using it for normalization even in cases that we don't do differential expression.

> DESeq2 is an R package that can normalize and handle RNA-seq data @Love2014.

Reviewer 2: Sure, but not mentioning that it does differential expression analysis in a section called `About DESeq2` seems a bit odd and saying `handle RNA-seq data` does not seem that useful to me.

Our refine.bio data is summarized to the gene-level with tximport before you download it @Soneson2015. 
In general, our examples suggest you download the data [non-quantile normalized](#about-quantile-normalization) so you can instead normalize the data with DESeq2, which requires you provide counts and *not* a normalized or corrected value like [TPMs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TTUrtCY2k-w).

### DESeq2 objects

Many R Bioconductor packages have specialized object types they want your data to be formatted as. 
For DESeq2, before we can use a lot the special functions, we need to get our data into a [`DESeqDataSet` object](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/DESeq2/versions/1.12.3/topics/DESeqDataSet-class). 
`DESeqDataSet` objects not only store your data, but additional transformations of your data, model information, etc. 

From our refine.bio datasets, we will use a function `DESeqDataSetFromMatrix()` to create our [`DESeqDataSet` objects](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/DESeq2/versions/1.12.3/topics/DESeqDataSet-class). 

### DESeq2 normalization methods

> Although DESeq2 has multiple normalization methods, we generally stick to `vst()` (Variance Stablizing Transformation) or `rlog()`. 

Reviewer 2: This comment is more general and probably should be applied in other RNA-seq notebooks (e.g., `03-rnaseq/dimension_reduction_rnaseq_01_pca.Rmd`), too.

Both methods are very similar, and correct for [library size differences]() but `rlog()` sometimes takes a bit longer to run. 
If you end up using a larger dataset and `rlog()` normalization takes a bit too long, you can switch to using `vst()` with confidence since previous data shows they yield similiar results given the dataset is large enough. 
For more about DESeq2 normalization, we highly recommend this [StatsQuest video]((https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UFB993xufUU)) which explains it quite nicely [@Starmer2017-deseq2].

> ### Further resources for DESeq2

Reviewer 2: Might want to link to this somewhere in here: https://hbctraining.github.io/DGE_workshop_salmon/lessons/02_DGE_count_normalization.html#common-normalization-methods

Author: I linked to this in the text, I dropped the Stats quest video about FPKMs and etc, this seems more relevant.

> - [StatsQuest: RPKM, FPKM and TPM, Clearly Explained!!!](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TTUrtCY2k-w) [@Starmer2015].

Author: They are not, but I wasn't sure where this fit better. Maybe I just remove it?

> - [StatsQuest: RPKM, FPKM and TPM, Clearly Explained!!!](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TTUrtCY2k-w) [@Starmer2015].

Reviewer 2: More resources section? We can also probably put what I mentioned here https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/pull/216/files#r490228160 there as well - seems like a (slightly) better fit

- [StatsQuest: DESeq2, part 1, Library Normalization](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UFB993xufUU) [@Starmer2017-deseq2].
- [DESeq2 vignette: Analyzing RNA-seq data with DESeq2](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html) [@Love2014].
- [Beginner's guide to DESeq2](Bhttps://bioc.ism.ac.jp/packages/2.14/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/beginner.pdf) [@Love2014-guide].
- [Introduction to DGE - using DESeq2](https://hbctraining.github.io/DGE_workshop/lessons/04_DGE_DESeq2_analysis.html) [@dge-workshop].

#### Why doesn't the gene I care about show up in this dataset?

> There can be a lot of reasons a particular gene might not show up in your refine.bio RNA-seq dataset, here are just a few reasons:  

Author: If they can't find the gene they want in their dataset is what I consider a gene "not showing up".

> There can be a lot of reasons a particular gene might not show up in your refine.bio RNA-seq dataset, here are just a few reasons:  

Reviewer 2: Does that mean

> Not be present in the gene identifier column?

> There can be a lot of reasons a particular gene might not show up in your refine.bio RNA-seq dataset, here are just a few reasons:  

Author: We include transcripts that aren't detected at all?

> There can be a lot of reasons a particular gene might not show up in your refine.bio RNA-seq dataset, here are just a few reasons:  

Reviewer 2: I don't think there's anything in our pipeline for what we're recommending here that would prevent those from being included (although it's been a bit since I've thought in depth about that). You can pull a handful RNA-seq experiments with QN skipped and see if you have rows with all zeroes. I expect the answer will be yes and isn't this why we include pre-filtering in some of our RNA-seq notebooks?

> There can be a lot of reasons a particular gene might not show up in your refine.bio RNA-seq dataset, here are just a few reasons:  

Author: Well, I could have seen a situation where none of the samples included had a non-zero value and that might be excluded from a refine.bio download, but perhaps if one sample expressed it it would still be maintained in the download. But, in the second instance, we'd still not want to rely on that for differential expression.

> There can be a lot of reasons a particular gene might not show up in your refine.bio RNA-seq dataset, here are just a few reasons:  

Author: But I just did a quick check and there are genes with a `rowSum()` of `0` are included so I'll delete these things.

> There can be a lot of reasons a particular gene might not show up in your refine.bio RNA-seq dataset, here are just a few reasons:  

Reviewer 2: > Well, I could have seen a situation where none of the samples included had a non-zero value and that might be excluded from a refine.bio download, but perhaps if one sample expressed it it would still be maintained in the download. 

What does this mean?

> There can be a lot of reasons a particular gene might not show up in your refine.bio RNA-seq dataset, here are just a few reasons:  

Author: This was in response to: 
> isn't this why we include pre-filtering in some of our RNA-seq notebooks?

 I think the filtering we do would have still been useful/needed even if refine.bio only included a genes' data if at least one of the samples expressed it. But I didn't know refine.bio includes genes when no samples express it.

> There can be a lot of reasons a particular gene might not show up in your refine.bio RNA-seq dataset, here are just a few reasons:  

Reviewer 2: Ah, gotcha!

  - The gene was not actually expressed in the cells in the first place.    
  - The gene was not expressed at high enough levels to be detectable.  
  - The gene does not have an Ensembl ID according to the [version of the annotation](TODO: Put link to refine.bio docs FAQ) we used.   

#### Why do these examples use DESeq2 and not EdgeR or ____

In short, both EdgeR and DESeq2 are good options and we at the CCDL just went with one of our preferences! 
[See this blog that summarizes these - by one of the creators of DESeq2](https://mikelove.wordpress.com/2016/09/28/deseq2-or-edger/), he agrees EdgeR is also great. 
But we needed to pick something, and our [refine.bio data is processed by tximport](http://docs.refine.bio/en/latest/main_text.html#processing-information), another package by the same creators of DESeq2, the creators of both these packages designed these packages to all play well together, and [we also really like their documentation and tutorials](#further-resources-for-deseq2). 

> But in the end, we are human and have our own preferences. 

Author: Does this comment mean you want me to delete part of my description here and/or do you want me to add something more to `About DESeq2`?

> But in the end, we are human and have our own preferences. 

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see how that was ambiguous. I think one sentence about why we chose DESeq2 under `About DESeq2` and then making this section `What about edgeR?` makes sense.

If you have strong preferences for EdgeR, you can definitely use your refine.bio data with it, but we currently do not have examples of that. 

> In this case, we'd refer you to [EdgeR's users guide](http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/edgeR/inst/doc/edgeRUsersGuide.pdf) and wish you the best of luck on your data adventures! 

Author: This one has EdgeR with counts: https://kasperdanielhansen.github.io/genbioconductor/html/Count_Based_RNAseq.html

#### What if I care about isoforms?

Unfortunately at this time, all refine.bio data is summarized to the gene-level, and there's no great way to examine isoforms with this data. 
If your research needs to know transcript isoform information, you may need to look elsewhere. 

> This [paper discusses some tools for these kinds of questions](https://bmcgenomics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12864-017-4002-1) @Zhang2017.

Author: I added a "hidden" TODO.

  - [DESeq2 transformation methods](#deseq2-transformation-methods)
  - [Further resources for DESeq2](#further-resources-for-deseq2)
    - [Why isn't the gene I care about in a refine.bio dataset?](#why-isnt-the-gene-i-care-about-in-a-refinebio-dataset)
    - [What about edgeR?](#what-about-edger)
    - [What if I care about isoforms?](#what-if-i-care-about-isoforms)
- [References](#references)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Introduction to RNA-seq technology

Data analyses are generally not "one size fits all"; this is particularly true between RNA-seq vs microarray data. 
This tutorial has example analyses [organized by technology](../01-getting-started/getting-started.html#about-how-this-tutorial-book-is-structured) so you can follow examples that are more closely tailored to the nature of the data at hand. 

As with all experimental methods, RNA-seq has strengths and limitations that you should consider in regards to your scientific questions. 

### RNA-seq data **strengths**  

- RNA-seq can assay unknown transcripts, as it is not bound to a pre-determined set of probes like microarrays [@Zhong2009].

> - Its values are considered more dynamic than microarray values which are constrained to the number of probes [@Zhong2009].

Author: > and a limited dynamic range of detection owing to both background and saturation of signals. 

Background and saturation. I'll put the word "saturation" in there to help make the point more clear.

- **GC bias**: higher GC content sequences are less likely to be observed.  
- **3' bias (positional bias)**: for most sequencing methods, the 3 prime end of transcripts are more likely to be observed.  
- **Complexity bias**: some sequences are easier to be bound and amplified than others.   
- **Library size or sequencing depth**: the total number of reads is not always equivalent between samples.  
- **Gene length**: longer genes are more likely to be observed.   

@bias-blog discusses these biases in this [blog post](https://mikelove.wordpress.com/2016/09/26/rna-seq-fragment-sequence-bias/) which includes this handy figure. 
  
<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/c93c3c94edcb42b20f73f37fd20d00e91e4b1ab7/components/figures/Love2016-fig1.png" width=700>

Most normalization methods, including [refine.bio's processing methods](http://docs.refine.bio/en/latest/main_text.html#rna-seq-pipelines), attempt to mitigate these biases, but these biases can never be fully negated.
Some of these biases have been addressed to the extent that they can by our refine.bio processing methods so you don't have to worry too much about them.

> In brief, refine.bio data is quantified by Salmon using their correction algorithms: [`--seqbias`](https://salmon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/salmon.html#seqbias) , [`--gcbias`](https://salmon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/salmon.html#gcbias), and [`--posBias`](https://salmon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/salmon.html#posbias).

Reviewer 2: We do not use `--posBias`: http://docs.refine.bio/en/latest/main_text.html#quantification-with-salmon

Author: Oh shoot. I meant to go back and look at this and I did not.

From our refine.bio datasets, we will use a function `DESeqDataSetFromMatrix()` to create our [`DESeqDataSet` objects](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/DESeq2/versions/1.12.3/topics/DESeqDataSet-class). 
This DESeq2 function requires you provide counts and *not* a normalized or corrected value like [TPMs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TTUrtCY2k-w).
Which is why our examples advise downloading [non-quantile normalized](#about-quantile-normalization) from refine.bio.

### DESeq2 transformation methods

Our examples recommend using DESeq2 for normalizing your RNA-seq data. 
You may have heard about or worked with FPKM, TPM, RPKMs; how does DESeq2's normalization compare? 
This [handy table from an online Harvard Bioinformatics Core course nicely summarizes and compares these different methods](https://hbctraining.github.io/DGE_workshop_salmon/lessons/02_DGE_count_normalization.html#common-normalization-methods) [@dge-workshop-deseq2].
For more about the steps behind DESeq2 normalization, we highly recommend this [StatsQuest video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UFB993xufUU) which explains it quite nicely [@Starmer2017-deseq2]. 

> To normalize and transform our data with DESeq2, we generally use `vst()` (Variance Stabilizing Transformation) or `rlog()`. 

Author: I suppose I should de-capitalize the `Variance Stabilizing Transformation`

[Both methods are very similar](http://master.bioconductor.org/packages/release/workflows/vignettes/rnaseqGene/inst/doc/rnaseqGene.html#the-variance-stabilizing-transformation-and-the-rlog).

> Both _normalize_ your data by correcting for library size differences but they also _transform_ your data by altering their distributions.

Author: I'll add a tad more. I don't think we need to put too much, because a good portion of users won't really care, and the ones that do will probably look at the sources we've put here, but a tad more detail; a tad less vagueness would be good.

### Further resources for DESeq2

- [StatsQuest: DESeq2, part 1, Library Normalization](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UFB993xufUU) [@Starmer2017-deseq2].
- [DESeq2 vignette: Analyzing RNA-seq data with DESeq2](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html) [@Love2014].
- [Beginner's guide to DESeq2](Bhttps://bioc.ism.ac.jp/packages/2.14/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/beginner.pdf) [@Love2014-guide].
- [Introduction to DGE - Count Normalization](https://hbctraining.github.io/DGE_workshop_salmon/lessons/02_DGE_count_normalization.html) [@dge-workshop-count-normalization]
- [Introduction to DGE - Using DESeq2](https://hbctraining.github.io/DGE_workshop/lessons/04_DGE_DESeq2_analysis.html) [@dge-workshop-deseq2].
- [RNA-seq workflow with DESeq2](http://master.bioconductor.org/packages/release/workflows/vignettes/rnaseqGene/inst/doc/rnaseqGene.html#the-variance-stabilizing-transformation-and-the-rlog)

#### Why isn't the gene I care about in a refine.bio dataset?

If a gene is not detected in any of the samples in a set through our processing, it is still kept in the `Gene` column, but it will be reported as `0`.

> But if the gene you are interested in does not have an Ensembl ID according to the [version of the annotation we ](TODO: Put link to refine.bio docs FAQ when https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-docs/issues/137 is addressed) we used, it will not be reported in any refine.bio download.   

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But if the gene you are interested in does not have an Ensembl ID according to the [version of the annotation](TODO: Put link to refine.bio docs FAQ when https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-docs/issues/137 is addressed) we used, it will not be reported in any refine.bio download.   
```
